Welcome back.
We've done a brief run through of the javascript runtime and asynchronous javascript.
Now this is something that we're gonna get into a little bit deeper later on in the course but I hope
by now you should have a good understanding of the difference between a JavaScript engine and a javascript
runtime the way that I like to think about it is like this.
You see a javascript file look kind of like musical notes ways for us to write music write programs
the JavaScript engine is kind of like the musician or the composer.
That person is the one that can read this music and understand it and make sense of it and then the
runtime is kind of like the whole package where we have the musician but we also give that musician
besides the musical notes.
All these tools to play our beautiful music.
So let me ask you this if we're able to have different javascript different times because while JavaScript
can run outside of the browser What do you think node j s as well is no G S a programming language is
no G S a JavaScript engine.
Is it a runtime.
Well this kind of gives it away.
It's a javascript runtime.
It's not a language it's a runtime you see up until 2009.
You ran javascript code inside of the browser.
That's why people didn't really respect javascript.
They thought it was a silly toy language.
Well Ryan doll in 2009 decided it would be great to run it outside the browser because up until now
we only had that runtime that web API and the callback Q In the event loop all browser based.
So he created node j yes which is actually a C++ program you can actually think of it as node dot e
XY it's an executable rate a C++ program that provides this runtime for us and if we look at the no
J.S. runtime you see that it looks quite similar with our browser based runtime doesn't it.
When it comes to node J.S. There are a few differences but it works the same way as our diagram.
We have our V8 engine and then we have our event loop and what they call our callback and they use something
called lib U V which again is written in C++ for us to do these asynchronous operations with the V8
engine.
Now when it comes to no G Yes it does a little bit more than our web browser runtime.
You see in the case of a browser we're limited to what we can do in the background right.
The browser isn't going to allow us to do much on the person's computer.
You can't really access for example the file system of the user.
I mean that would be a huge security flaw it just runs on the browser on the tab that we're currently
on in what we call a sandbox environment.
But in node we can pretty much do most of the things in the background.
We can access file systems.
We can do all sorts of things.
You see no GSA uses the Google V8 engine to understand the javascript but it uses this lib u v library
which works along to create this event loop to extend what we can do in the background.
Now here's the fun thing.
If I install no GSA my computer and let's just run node if I type in window here.
Well I get an error there's no window like we had in the browser.
Instead node has something called global and that's its global API.
You see that.
Just like we had with window in node we have this global API that we can use which also happens to have
set time out set and terrible.
That's nice but also has some extra things that we couldn't do in a browser and that is why node is
set to be a server side platform based on asynchronous IO that is non blocking.
It means that it uses javascript but outside of the browser but it creates this entire environment.
This runtime that runs outside of the browser and it allows us to have the same model of a single threaded
model but any asynchronous tasks can be non blocking that is they can be passed on to what we call work
or threats in the background to do the work for us and then get sent back through the callback queue
an event loop onto the stack.
We were able in 2009 to have a different model to perhaps create servers you see back in the day we
would create a thread for each request something like P HB would work like this and if what we call
the threat pool that is however much the server can work is maxed out.
Well the requests would just have to wait for the other ones to be available again no J.S. changed this
mentality and said hey we only have this one single threat but as soon as you give me a thread I'm just
going to pass it off to my asynchronous runtime to take care of it.
And this simplified things a lot.
Now there's pros and cons to each method but I hope now you see the power of the runtime.
How would ads on this extra feature to JavaScript so that we can finally have the capabilities we had
in the browser but also the capabilities outside of the browser.
I'll see in the next video.